.. :mode=rest: (for jEdit edit mode)

Introduction
------------

Jude is :bible:gk:`the`  epistle on :gk:`apostasy`. It is very appropriate nowadays as many churches are subject to false doctrine and practices, and Jude stands as a reminder of the dangers of false teachers and teaching.

Jude divides into four sections

#. Introduction. (verses 1-3)

#. The apostates position and history. (verses 4-19)

#. What we ought to do about it as believers. (verses 20-23)

#. Our confidence in the Lord Jesus Christ.	(verses 24-25)

This is a very systematic treatment of the subject. It was written by Jude, the name being the Greek form of Judah (Y'hudah). With James (Jacob, Ya'akov), he is one of the half brothers of the Lord Jesus Christ. Both letters are very Jewish in their style and tone, they are practical and focused on correcting specific problems within the local church, and some references can appear to be obscure at first reading. There are similarities to the pastoral epistles, as the theme is the same; the defence of the truth of the historic gospel against the attacks of heretical innovators.    


It also bears many similarities to 2 Peter, from which some believe it draws much of its content. [#]_ It is clear that one was used by the other, but which is first is still a point of debate, where good scholars differ. Compare Jude 3-18, with `2 Peter 2:1-18`, and see the parallels. The probability is that not much time elapsed between them. In Jude we have the first though, in Peter the second thought. (Robertson, 1933, Vol VI, page 183).   Mayor and Robertson's conclusion, "feels right", but this is as precise as we can be.  

.. [#] "It has a secondary origin since it summarises in an elegant style points which 2 Peter expounds with greater effort and more detail. Such smoothness of style is frequently characteristic of editors who condense and revise what has been laboriously drawn up by others." (Reike, 1984, page 189 - 190).

The heretics appear to be people who combine several eastern philosophies with basic sexual immorality; as Moffatt, 1963, describes them, "an unholy alliance between speculative theosophy and practical immorality"(page 220).

Jude speaks like an old Hebrew prophet, and we are directed to remember our place in the affections of the Father, and so correct our lives. This is balanced by the clear judgement message, with what one writer calls, the "whirlwind of his wrath", being held out as the Lord's answer to this sort of evil. (Farrar, IBID, page 227). 

While Jude's authorship has been questioned [#]_ , we have good evidence from history that it is as it appears the work of the Lord's half brother. The early church councils debated this letter thoroughly and were closer to events than we are. "What reason have we for rejecting the verdict of Ecclesiastics and theologians of the fourth and fifth centuries, who were well aware of the doubts which had been raised respecting the authority of the letter and after serious and prolonged consideration decided that it possessed full canonical authority." (Plummer, 1896, page 366). 

.. [#] Both books deal with, "Grave errors" (Plummer, 1896, page 376), and Jude simply, "denounces the errors, instead of describing them". (Roberts, 1963, page 218). "When the handling of the Greek language is considered the authorship of the Galilean villager who was the brother of Jesus seems difficult to affirm." (Reike, IBID, page 191). This is easily dismissed, as the Galileans were all fluent in Greek and Aramaic, as these were the two languages of the region. To operate in the Galilee you needed both.    

   Sidebottom, 1982, pages 72 - 79, believes it to be pseudonymous, but sees that it is similar to the Pauline Pastoral epistles . Farrar, page 236, notes. "The style of the Greek is exactly as we should  expect from one whom Greek was not so familiar as his native Aramaic, but who still writes with a passion which gives force and eloquence to his words. It is the language of an oriental who knows Greek, partly by reading and partly by having moved among Hellenistic communities, but whose vocabulary is far richer and more powerful than his grammar."


Out of interest there are a number of men with the name Jude / Judas / Judah in the New Testament; it was a common name. There was the betrayer, Judas, and the one Judas, not Iscariot, `John 14 : 22`. There is Jude of James, `Luke 6:6`, Jude the Lord's brother, `Matthew 13:55`, Jude of Galilee, `Acts 5:37`, Jude of Damascus, `Acts 9:11`, and, Jude Barsabbas, `Acts 15 : 22`.

We know very little about Jude. Farrar notes, "even tradition, which delights to furnish particulars respecting the apostles and leaders of the early church is silent about him." During the persecution under Domitian, Jude's grand-sons are brought before the Emperor, as the descendants of the throne of David, and Eusebius (3:20) records that they were poor farmers with only about seven acres of land between them.  (Recorded in, Farrar 1882, page 221-225).    

We are reminded in this story of the ordinariness and simple, even in our terms, economically unsuccessful lives, of the believers within the early church, and also of the cost of discipleship for many of the early Jewish believers. Farrar speaks of, "the simplicity and poverty which continued to the end to be the earthly lot of those who were connected with the Holy family of Nazareth." (Farrar, IBID, page 225).

It was written to the churches in Palestine in the period 66-69 AD, [#]_ and combined with the letter to the Hebrews, which also dates from around this time, it was the last warning to the Jewish churches before the Roman war 66-71 AD. 

.. [#] Dates vary regarding Jude, with most liberals dating quite late in the first century, even Bo Reike, believing that the date is during the 90s shortly before the persecution of Diocletian. (Reike, 1964, page xv).    He notes, "It has been argued that the heresy referred to by Jude could not have come into existence before the end of the first century." (IBID, page 191).    

   To counter this view Green, 1968, page 47, notes.  "The fact that Jude refers to what the apostles said rather than wrote suggests that we are still moving within the oral period, when apostolic teaching was largely passed on by word of mouth." Guthrie is right when he states; "much of the so called evidence on this subject amounts to little more than guesses". (Guthrie, 1962, page 229).


It was a time of political instability, with a series of bad Roman Procurators, and many terrible things were happening in Jerusalem with murder and assassinations becoming daily events, and a general breakdown of law and order. In this environment the Church was not giving the clear witness that the days demanded. In our own troubled days, like those of Jude, we must ask ourselves, are we giving the clear witness to the world that it desperately needs?

There were many people in the church who were teaching false doctrine. They were robbing the Christians of their assurance at the very time when they needed to be confident in the truth. The good news is, the members of the Jewish churches of Palestine heeded this letter, they correctly acted in accordance with it, and were saved from the great catastrophe that befell the Jewish people in the years of the rebellion.

Jude quotes from and alludes to both the book of Enoch and the Assumption of Moses. These two non-canonical books have never been accepted as scripture by the church as a whole but were "highly esteemed", by the early church. (Green, 1968, page 49).   

Our position on this matter is clear; the parts of these two books that are alluded to or quoted from are clearly certified by the Holy Spirit as correct, but that does not mean the whole text of these books is correct. Jude refers to the parts that are true, as to the rest of them, the church decided they were not up to scriptural standard for truth.


