Intercession For Onesimus
-------------------------

.. biblepassage:: Philemon 1:8-21

Analysis and Background
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

*verse 8* One of the main subjects of this epistle is the crisis of grace. The greatest enemy of Christianity is legalism. When a person does something legalistic they are doing something right, something compatible with self righteousness.

The Colossian church is under two separate attacks, the doctrinal attack of Gnosticism which is refuted by the book of Colossians and the grace attack refuted by the letter to Philemon.

Onesimus ran away as an unbeliever, he returns as a mature believer, a member of the family of God. He is however a slave. 

If Philemon greets his slave in grace and gives him a letter of release he will be one of the great believers of his time. 

However if he uses his legitimate legal rights he will be tempted to censor and punish, to make Onesimus miserable in some way. 

Paul failed a similar test as is facing Philemon in the case of John Mark:

a. In `Acts 12:25` John Mark was included in Paul’s missionary journey with Barnabas.

#. In `Acts 13:13` John [Mark] however does not complete the journey and returned to Jerusalem.

#. In `Acts 15:36-41` Paul has a violent argument with Barnabas as he refuses to take Mark on his second missionary journey because of his past performance. Barnabas takes John Mark whilst Paul takes Silas. Paul here failed the grace test.

#. In `Philemon 1:24` however an older Paul calls Mark a fellow labourer.

#. Paul failed the grace test and encourages Philemon not to follow that path.

If Philemon the leader fails the whole church will go down in legalism.

Wherefore is the conjunction ‘Dia’ plus ‘Hos’ which means because of which.

Might be is the present active participle of ‘Echo’ which means to have. This is the static present which shows that Paul has the authority to order Philemon to forgive his runaway slave and free him. He would never use it as it would destroy the issue completely.

Paul’s job is to teach doctrine to Philemon which he did. Paul reflects on the fact that he taught Philemon many years ago, that as an apostle he could have used his authority as the highest ranking Christian and order him to do it but he allows him to use his own free will.

‘Much bold’ is a combination of ‘Polis’ meaning great and ‘Parresia’ means confidence

‘In Christ’ should be translated ‘by Christ’ as Paul’s authority came directly from Christ.

‘To enjoin you’ is the present active infinitive of ‘Epitasso’. This is in the customary present which shows that he frequently uses orders to solve problems. Active voice shows that Paul has the authority, the infinitive is the infinitive of perceived result.

‘That which is convenient’ present active participle of ‘Aneko’ which is used to show something which is fitting or right. Here it is used in the idiomatic sense of doing your duty.

‘Therefore though I might have maximum authority by means of Christ to command you to do your duty.’

The Grace Crisis
................

If Paul orders Philemon, Philemon will act under orders from Paul without making any decision of his own. 

He therefore loses his ability to function in grace. 

The believer has to be spiritually independent. Paul cannot be Philemon’s crutch.

Philemon has to choose between grace and legalism and to operate on his own motivation.

*verse 9* Paul demonstrates full confidence in the doctrine in the soul of Philemon. 

Dia plus the accusative of agape means because of your love

I would rather beseech thee is the present active indicative of parakaleo which means to encourage even more. Paul is being encouraging not only to Philemon but to all who have the grace crisis. 

The present tense is an aoristic present, it is a momentary encouragement as Paul appeals for proper motivation. 

Being is the present active participle of eimi such a person as Paul the aged. Aged is not a good translation. It is presbutes which means an elder statesman. Paul by calling himself a mature Christian put himself on the same level as Philemon. Paul has a superior rank of apostle and is older than Philemon but does not use it, he speaks as to an equal.

He calls himself a prisoner which puts Philemon on his own. Esmios means that he is a prisoner of Christ Jesus in Rome. This shows that Paul is unable to do anything else and puts it on both Onesimus and Philemon to sort out their problems.

*verses 10-12* The grace presentation of the issue.

I beseech is the present active indicative of parakaleo. The present is an aoristic present with the indicative being the reality.

The decision that Philemon is going to take is one for which he is going to be responsible for the rest of his life.

For my son is peri and the genitive of teknon which means a student or child in relation to his father or mother. This was used for the citizens of the nation but is usually used by Paul of theological students.

Accusative singular of Onesimos which means profitable or useful. Aorist active indicative of Genneo which means to give birth which for a man means to sire. 

The aorist tense is a constantive aorist which looks at the day of conversion, the days of instruction and the results. The active voice showed that Paul evangelised and taught Philemon and Onesimus. The indicative mood means that Paul is making a simple statement of fact. He has led Onesimus to the Lord and then taught him so that he has grown into a mature believer.

Paul is saying “When you had Profitable you did not have Profitable. Now you do not have Profitable but you are going to have Profitable

Who I have sent anapempo means to send back. The aorist tense shows that Philemon needs a test and a blessing. He has been a blessing to Paul and he wants him to be a blessing to Philemon.

Now therefore receive is not found in the text and should be deleted.

Bowels does not mean intestines but means tender affections, it is a demonstrative pronoun and a possessive adjective. In essence he is saying that he is doing the best possible thing for you.

*verse 13-15* The Grace status of Onesimus

Whom I would – I would is the imperfect active indicative of boulomai which is a decision made as the basis of very deep thinking. 

Paul hates to part with Onesimus so that it is a true statement that Paul desires to retain him.

Retain is the perfect active infinitive of katecho which means to hold down or to detain. This grace crisis cannot be resolved if Paul retains him. Once he reaches maturity Paul knows he has to part with him and cut him loose. This is combined with the accusative pronoun meaning for myself.

Minister is the present active subjunctive of *daikoneo*.

Paul then states the goal. He would have liked Onesimus to stay and minister to Paul on behalf of Philemon. Paul really needed him but recognises that he must go to Philemon. 

In my chains of the gospel. In this sense he is able to serve the Lord wherever he is.

It is necessary for there to be a confrontation between the two. The slave represents his master in service to Paul. He indicates that Philemon himself could not serve him better than Onesimus.

The word for mind is gnome which means opinion or consent. Paul indicates that he would not wish to do anything without Philemon’s consent. 

Aorist active indicative of theleo which means to desire. This is followed by aorist active infinitive of poieo which shows purpose.

Agathos means for his intrinsic good. It is going to be for Philemon’s benefit to be tested in this manner. He further notes that this should not be from compulsion but from his own free will.

*verse 15* he dynamics of facing the problem. 

Therefore is dia plus houtos followed by the aorist passive indicative of chorizo means that he was taken away from you Philemon for a season so that he could be with you forever . 

Philemon probably thought that Onesimus was gone for good. 

Season is the accusative singular of Hora which means an hour. 

Paul says for Philemon to think of the period that Onesimus has been gone as just an hour. The time is short if the results are positive. He returns to you as a mature believer rather than an unregenerated slave. When you compare two years absence with eternity it is nothing.

That introduces a purpose clause thou shouldest receive is the present active subjunctive of echo. This means to have and to hold or receive back Onesimus forever.

Believers must mature while they have the opportunity to so that you can be self sustaining. The moral order of a nation sustains the social order of a nation. 

*verse 16-25* The Crisis Of Grace

*Philemon’s dilemma - verses 16-17*

Ouketia Hos Doulos – no longer as a slave but more than a slave, 

Huper plus the accusative of Doulos, a brother beloved. He is respected by the believers in Rome.

Specially to me – Melista Emoi means most of all to me, but how much more to you. You have the privilege of receiving him back as a believer both in the flesh and in the Lord.

No longer a slave but more than a slave, a beloved brother first of all to me but how much more to you both in the flesh and in the Lord.

Verses 16 and 17 give one of the best illustrations of full substitution and imputation. Behind Paul’s plea is Christ’s plea to the Father on behalf of the sinner who trusts Christ as the Saviour. That sinner is received on the same standing that Christ is received. We are accepted in the beloved – `Ephesians 1:6` 

*verse 17* – Present active indicative of Echo which means to have and not to count.

If you have me as a partner, Koinoina. 

Receive him is the aorist middle imperative of Proslambano. The active voice means to take advantage of someone whereas in the middle voice it means to accept into one’s society. The imperative mood is the imperative of entreaty and has the force of a request and not a command.

Paul then uses the accusative singular direct object of the intensive pronoun Autos which emphasises someone in the passage being very special which in this case is Onesimus.

*The case for grace - verses 18-19*

If is in the first class condition. If he has wronged you and he has. Paul does not downgrade Onesimus running away with money that he stole. Wrong is the constantive aorist which means the constant wronging of Philemon. Active voice indicates Onesimus produced the action, the indicative mood is the reality of the wrong done by him.

Paul acknowledges that Onesimus was totally wrong and Philemon was totally right

You have me as a partner receive Onesimus as you would receive me.

“Or oweth thee ought, and he does. It is a hopeless debt. Put it on my account present active imperative of Ellogoe which means to impute or charge to an account. This is a grace credit system. You have receive grace and therefore you should be gracious to others.

Paul led Philemon to the Lord and spent time teaching him so that he could mature.

Repay is Apotino which means to pay damages. It is in the future active indicative.

I Paul by my own hand which is a dramatic aorist, I will pay you the damages.

Albeit is the conjunction Hina which means so that.

Present active subjunctive of Lego plus the negative Ne. I will not need to mention that you owe me yourself. Paul indicates that he would rather pay off the debt of Onesimus rather than to mention that Philemon owes him a greater debt. It is to Philemon’s advantage not to be reminded how much he owes Paul.

Prosopheilo  to owe. Paul is saying that Philemon owes him his life but he would hate to mention that. This is a subtle and sarcastic way of saying it.

*verse 20* Brother let me joy, let me have joy “Onemi” which is the basis of Onesimus which means to profit or benefit. Let me have benefit from you. 

This is permissive and is an expression of a wish. He must do it from his own free will.

In the Lord is en plus the instrumental which means because of the Lord. As we have been treated in Christ so we must trust others.

Refreshed is the word Anapauo which means to give rest again, which again is in the imperative of entreaty, a request. My deep affection is the meaning of bowels. No one ever loses with grace.

Paul is not confident in Philemon but confident of the doctrine within Philemon.

At the same time also prepare me a lodging for I hope that through your prayers I will be graciously given to you. 

Application
~~~~~~~~~~~

Legalism never glorifies God, it glorifies the person who practices it.

If the leader fails in the area of legalism the whole church will go down in legalism.

In a grace crisis you are on your own. You are to consult with no one. You are to consult with the Biblical treasures you have within you. Paul therefore restrains himself from using his apostolic authority.

The principle is that social ills cannot be solved by force or coercion.

In seeking to solve problems by force greater problems are created or the original problem intensified.

Seeking to solve social evil by legislation is the greatest of fallacies. The law should be designed to assist freedom. 

The military and the police force should be for the protection of freedom. 

Neither legislation or violence can turn back the tide of evil.

Progress is only made where you have Christian maturity or an unbeliever who works on Christian principles.

Onesimus a slave in Philemon’s house would not respond to Philemon. 

Before Onesimus responded he had to be in abject poverty and hopelessness.

He would never understand grace until he is down and out.

By leaving the security of Philemon it brought about a state of destitution and desperation which is what was needed.

Onesimus had to come to the end of himself before he could ever come to understand grace which is what he did as a fugitive in Rome.

There are concerns on both Philemon and Onesimus’s minds. Philemon has a choice of legalism or grace, Onesimus is concerned as to what Philemon might do. 

Onesimus the runaway slave is now useful. Paul says that he is sending him to Philemon and he is now going to be useful to you. 

What makes the difference, first his salvation and secondly growth and grace. This is going to bring a dilemma which requires a decision.

Principle - Though still a slave Onesimus is equal to his master Philemon in spiritual matters.

So whether Onesimus remains a slave or is emancipated he is still a fellow believer, a member of the royal family of God an has advanced to maturity.

Paul is not pushing for emancipation of Onesimus here but establishing the fact that the fugitive slave of yesterday is the mature believer of today.

Paul has expressed his admiration for Onesimus and wants Philemon to share in his admiration for him.

In the flesh Onesimus is Philemon’s slave, in the Lord Onesimus is Philemon’s brother in Christ.

This does not change their human relationship in the flesh. This is not unlike a Christian working for a Christian boss. He should be a better employee than any other in the company. 

Union with Christ does not set aside the problem of authority in the world.

As you would receive me. For Paul Philemon would roll out the red carpet so he suggests he receives Onesimus the same way. Forgive as Christ forgave. No grace crisis can be resolved other than by a grace principle.

We as sinners are in a hopeless situation but all the charge was placed on Christ. He paid for our debt in full. We have been blessed by grace so we should bless others.

Brothers in Christ vary but our response to the mature Christian should always be in the form of grace.

Verses 10-20  A Reflection of Christ
....................................

1. In His ministry of Intercession, verse 10

   a. His High Priestly prayer, John 17

   #. His present ministry to us, `Romans 8:31-34, Hebrews 13:20` (Great Shepherd), `Hebrews 7:25`


#. In His ministry of Transformation, verse 11

   a. A “new creation” in Christ, `2 Corinthians 5:17`

   #. Vessels useful to the master, `2 Timothy 2:20-21`

   #. Contrast `Ephesians 2:10` with `James 2:14-20`. Faith without works is useless.


   “Onesimus” means “Useful”

   Five Works of The Holy Spirit at salvation

#. Baptism, `1 Corinthians 12:13` new standing.

#. Regeneration, `Titus 3:5` new life.

#. Indwelling, `Romans 8:9-11` new power.

#. Gifting, `1 Corinthians 12:4-7` new purpose.

#. Sealing, `Ephesians 4:30` new destiny.

#. In His Ministry of Provision, verses 12-15

   a. Christ gave up all, that we may have all, verses 12,13. c/f. `2 Corinthians 8:9, Philippians 2:5-9`.

   #. Christ came to serve, not to be served, `Mark 10:45, Romans 15:3`.

   #. His ministry to us always waits on our free will, verse 14.

   #. Often He removes things for a time only to restore them for eternal blessing, verses 15,16.


#. In His Work of Justification, verses 15-16.

   a. He releases captives and sets slaves free, `Luke 4:18, Isaiah 61:1`.2, `Galatians 5:1,13, Romans 6:15-23`

   #. He takes the useless and uses them for Divine glory, `1 Corinthians 1:27-31`.

   #. He takes vessels of clay and fills them with Divine treasure, `2 Corinthians 4:7`

   #. To “justify” means to “declare righteous”.

   #. Justification makes the sinner acceptable in The Lord’s sight, `Romans 3:23-28`

   #. Because of justification, the conditions of enmity are changed to amity and peace, `Romans 5:1,8-10`.

   #. Justification transforms us from vessels of wrath to objects of His love, `John 3:36, Ephesians 2:2,3` to `Ephesians 1:6, 5:1-2`.


#. In His Work of Imputation, verses 17-20.

   a. By imputation, the sinner’s sins are transferred to Jesus Christ, `2 Corinthians 5:18-21`.

   #. Because of this, Christ’s righteousness can be imputed to all who believe, `Romans 4:3,23, Romans 3:22, Romans 1:16-17`

   #. Paul says of the debt of Onesimus, “charge that to my account.. I will repay”, verses 18-19.

   #. Because of this Philemon is requested to receive Onesimus as he would the Apostle Paul, verse 17. The truth of `Ephesians 1:6` “accepted in the Beloved”.

   #. Jesus Christ has removed from us our debt to God, `Colossians 2:14`.

   #. His cry on the cross, “It is finished” `John 19:30`, was written across the sentence of criminals in Rome whose debt had been paid.

   #. Note verse 20- Christ’s great joy is to bring sinners to God justified and declared righteous. `1 Peter 3:18, 2:24-25, Hebrews 12:2`.

   #. Thus He is our mediator and advocate before The Father. `1 Timothy 2:5, 1 John 2:2`

   #. Thus as believers we owe to Him all we are and have, verse 19. `2 Corinthians 5:14,15, Romans 12:1,2` “freed from sin, enslaved to God”, `Romans 6:22`.


   NOTE: Sins cannot be imputed twice. Once borne, they cannot be borne by another.

